docs/source/index.rst, before:

Chaco Documentation
===================

Chaco is a Python package for building interactive and custom 2-D plots and
visualizations. It is part of the `Enthought Tool Suite <http://code.enthought.com/>`_. 

Chaco is a Python plotting application toolkit that facilitates writing
plotting applications at all levels of complexity, from simple scripts with
hard-coded data to large plotting programs with complex data interrelationships
and a multitude of interactive tools. While Chaco generates attractive static
plots for publication and presentation, it also works well for interactive
data visualization and exploration.

Chaco includes renderers for many popular plot types, built-in implementations of
common interactions with those plots, and a framework for extending and
customizing plots and interactions.  Chaco can also render graphics in a
non-interactive fashion to images, in either raster or vector formats, and it
has a subpackage for doing command-line plotting or simple scripting.


+----------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+
|.. image::  images/simple_line.png      |.. image::  images/scalar_function.png|
|   :width: 400 px                       |   :width: 400 px                     |
|   :align: center                       |   :align: center                     |
+----------------------------------------+--------------------------------------+

.. toctree::
  :maxdepth: 2

  quickstart.rst
  user_manual/tutorial.rst
  user_manual/index.rst
  programmers_reference.rst
  tech_notes.rst



* :ref:`search`

Commit message:

DOC: Main page simplified, removed outdated content, general re-organization

docs/source/index.rst, after:

Chaco 4.1.0
===========

Chaco is a Python package for building interactive and custom 2-D plots and
visualizations.
Chaco facilitates writing
plotting applications at all levels of complexity, from simple scripts with
hard-coded data to large plotting programs with complex data interrelationships
and a multitude of interactive tools. While Chaco generates attractive static
plots for publication and presentation, it also works well for interactive
data visualization and exploration.
Chaco is part of the `Enthought Tool Suite <http://code.enthought.com/>`_.

Chaco includes renderers for many popular plot types, built-in implementations of
common interactions with those plots, and a framework for extending and
customizing plots and interactions.  Chaco can also render graphics in a
non-interactive fashion to images, in either raster or vector formats, and it
has a subpackage for doing command-line plotting or simple scripting.

For a quick sample of Chaco's features, see the
`gallery <http://code.enthought.com/projects/chaco/gallery.php>`_, the
:ref:`annotated examples <examples>` page, the
:ref:`tutorial and examples <tutorials>`
and the :ref:`resources <resources>` page.



Documentation
-------------

.. toctree::
  :maxdepth: 1

  Installation and quickstart guide <quickstart.rst>
  user_manual/tutorials_and_examples.rst
  user_manual/index.rst
  programmers_reference.rst
  tech_notes.rst

------------

.. image::  images/chaco_show.png
   :width: 800 px
   :align: center

* :ref:`search`
