
.. _modules_and_classes:

Commonly Used Modules and Classes
=================================

Base Classes
------------

.. rubric:: Plot Component

All visual components in Chaco subclass from PlotComponent.  It defines all of
the common visual attributes like background color, border styles and color,
and whether the component is visible.  (Actually, most of these visual
attributes are inherited from the Enable drawing framework.)  More importantly,
it provides the base behaviors for participating in layout, handling event
dispatch to tools and overlays, and drawing various layers in the correct
order.  Subclasses almost never need to override or customize these base
behaviors, but if they do, there are several easy extension points. 
 

Data Objects
------------

Data Source
~~~~~~~~~~~

A data source is a wrapper object for the actual data that it will be
handling. It provides methods for retrieving data, estimating a size of the
dataset, indications about the dimensionality of the data, a place for metadata
(such as selections and annotations), and events that fire when the data gets
changed. There are two primary reasons for a data source class: 

* It provides a way for different plotting objects to reference the same data.
* It defines the interface for embedding Chaco into an existing application.  
  In most cases, the standard ArrayDataSource will suffice. 

    *Interface:* :class:`AbstractDataSource``

    *Subclasses:* :class:`ArrayDataSource`, :class:`MultiArrayDataSource`, 
    :class:`PointDataSource`, :class:`GridDataSource`, :class:`ImageData`

Data Range
~~~~~~~~~~

A data range expresses bounds on data space of some dimensionality.  The
simplest data range is just a set of two scalars representing (low, high)
bounds in 1-D.  One of the important aspects of DataRanges is that their bounds
can be set to ``auto``, which means that they automatically scale to fit their
associated datasources.  (Each DataSource can be associated with multiple
ranges, and each DataRange can be associated with multiple datasources.)

    *Interface*: ``AbstractDataRange``

    *Subclasses*: ``BaseDataRange``, ``DataRange1D``, ``DataRange2D``
 
**Mapper**

Mappers perform the job of mapping a data space region to screen space, and
vice versa.

    *Interface*: ``AbstractMapper``

    *Subclasses*: ``Base1DMapper``, ``LinearMapper``, ``LogMapper``, ``GridMapper``, ``PolarMapper``


Containers
----------

**PlotContainer**

PlotContainers are Chaco's way for handling layout.  Because they logically
partition the screen space, they also serve as a way for efficient event
dispatch.  They are very similar to sizers or layout grids in GUI toolkits like
WX.  Containers are subclasses of PlotComponent, thus allowing them to be
nested.  BasePlotContainer implements the logic to correctly render and
dispatch events to sub-components, while its subclasses implement the different
layout calculations.  Chaco currently has three types of containers: 

    *Interface*: ``BasePlotContainer``

    *Subclasses*: ``OverlayPlotContainer``, ``HPlotContainer``, ``VPlotContainer``, ``GridPlotContainer``


Renderers
---------


Tools
-----


Overlays
--------


Miscellaneous
-------------


