docs/source/user_manual/tutorial_2.rst, before:


.. _tutorial_2:

#######################################
Plotting Scientific Problems with Chaco
#######################################

Overview
========

Chaco is an interactive 2D plotting package for Python.  Once you have
defined a Chaco plot, the application takes care of updating itself,
which leaves you with relatively little coding overhead.  For further
information, Chaco also has it's own page on the wiki that can be
found `here. <https://svn.enthought.com/enthought/wiki/ChacoProject>`_
This resource includes further documentation, examples and tutorials.

This tutorial explains more about Chaco and Traits through the
creation of an example program that generates the plot of a scientific
equation.  In particular, we will model `Van Der Waal's Equation
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Van_der_Waals_equation>`_, which is a
modification to the ideal gas law that takes into account the nonzero
size of molecules and the attraction to each other that they
experience.


.. contents::

Development Setup
=================

In review, Traits is a manifest typing package for python.  It also
provides UI features that will be used to create a simple GUI.  The
Traits and Traits UI user manuals are good resources for learning
about the packages and can be found on the `Traits Wiki
<https://svn.enthought.com/enthought/wiki/Traits>`_.  The wiki
includes features, technical notes, cookbooks, FAQ and more.

You must have Chaco and it's dependencies installed:

   * Traits
   * TraitsGUI
   * Enable
   * Chaco


Writing the Program
===================

First, define a Traits class and the elements necessary need to model
the task.  The following Traits class is made for the Van Der Waal
equation, whose variables can be viewed on this wiki page, `Wikipedia
link <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Van_der_Waals_equation>`_.  The
volume and pressure variables hold lists of our X and Y coordinates,
respectively, and are defined as arrays.  The variables attraction and
totVolume are the input parameters specified by the user.  The type of
the variables as will dictate their appearance in the GUI.  For
example, attraction and totVolume are defined as Ranges, so they will
show up as slide bars.  Likewise, plot_type will be shown as a drop
down menu since it is defined as an Enum::

    # We'll also import a few things to be used later.
    from enthought.traits.api \
        import HasTraits, Array, Range, Float, Enum, on_trait_change, Property
    from enthought.traits.ui.api import View, Item 
    from enthought.chaco.chaco_plot_editor import ChacoPlotItem
    from numpy import arange
    
    class Data(HasTraits):
        volume = Array
        pressure = Array
        attraction = Range(low=-50.0,high=50.0,value=0.0)
        totVolume = Range(low=.01,high=100.0,value=0.01)
        temperature = Range(low=-50.0,high=50.0,value=50.0)
        r_constant= Float(8.314472)
        plot_type = Enum("line", "scatter")
    
    ....    


Creating the View
=================

The main GUI window is created by defining a Traits View instance.
This View contains all of the GUI elements, including the plot.  To
link a variable with a widget element on the GUI, we create a Traits
Item instance with the same name as the variable and pass it as an
argument of the Traits View instance declaration.  The Traits UI user
manual discusses the View and Item objects in depth.  In order to
embed a Chaco plot into a Traits View, you need to import the
ChacoPlotItem, which can be passed as a parameter to View just like a
the Item objects.  The first two arguments to ChacoPlotItem are the
lists of X and Y coordinates for the graph.  The variables volume and
pressure hold the lists of X and Y coordinates, and therefore are the
first two arguments to the Chaco2PlotItem.  Other parameters have been
provided to the plot for additional customization::

    class Data(HasTraits):
        ....
    
        traits_view = View(ChacoPlotItem("volume", "pressure",
                                   type_trait="plot_type",
                                   resizable=True,
                                   x_label="Volume",
                                   y_label="Pressure",
                                   x_bounds=(-10,120),
                                   x_auto=False,
                                   y_bounds=(-2000,4000),
                                   y_auto=False,
                                   color="blue",
                                   bgcolor="white",
                                   border_visible=True,
                                   border_width=1,
                                   title='Pressure vs. Volume',
                                   padding_bg_color="lightgray"),
                           Item(name='attraction'),
                           Item(name='totVolume'),
                           Item(name='temperature'),   
                           Item(name='r_constant', style='readonly'),
                           Item(name='plot_type'),
                           resizable = True,
                           buttons = ["OK"],
                           title='Van der waal Equation',
                           width=900, height=800)
    ....

    
Updating the Plot
=================

The power of Traits and Chaco enable the plot to update itself
whenever the X or Y arrays are changed.  So, we need a function to
re-calculate the X and Y coordinate lists whenever the input
parameters are changed by the user moving the sliders in the GUI.

The volume variable is the independent variable and pressure is the
dependent variable.  The relationship between pressure and volume, as
derived from the equation found on the wiki page, is::
 
               r_constant * Temperature       attraction
   Pressure =  ------------------------   -   ----------
                  Volume - totVolume          Volume**2


Next, there are two programing tasks to complete,

1. Define trait listener methods for your input parameters. These
   methods should be automatically called whenever the parameters are
   changed since it will be time to recalculate the pressure array.

2. Write a calculation method that will update your lists of X and
   Y coordinates for your plot.

The following is the code for these two needs::

    # Re-calculate when attraction, totVolume, or temperature are changed.
    @on_trait_change('attraction, totVolume, temperature')
    def calc(self):
        """ Update the data based on the numbers specified by the user. """
        self.volume = arange(.1, 100)
        self.pressure = ((self.r_constant*self.temperature) 
		         /(self.volume - self.totVolume)   
                        -(self.attraction/(self.volume*self.volume)))
        return

The calc() function computes the pressure array using the current
values of the independent variables.  Meanwhile, the
@on_trait_change() decorator (provided by Traits) tells Python to call
calc() whenever any of the variables attraction, totVolume, or
temperature change.


Testing your Program
====================

The application is complete, and can be tested by instantiating a copy
of the class and then creating the view by calling the
configure_traits() method on the class.  For a simple test, run these
lines from an interpreter or a separate module::

    from vanderwaals import Data
    viewer = Data()
    viewer.calc()            # Must calculate the initial (x,y) lists
    viewer.configure_traits()

Clicking and dragging on the sliders in the GUI will dynamically
update the pressure data array, and cause the plot to update, showing
the new values.

Screenshots
===========

Here is what the program looks like,

.. image:: images/vanderwaals.png


But it could be better....
==========================

It seems inconvenient to have to call a calculation function manually
before we configure_traits().  Also, the pressure equation depends on
the values of other variables, it would be nice to make the
relationship between the dependant and independent variables clearer.
There is another way we could define our variables that is easier for
the user, and provides better source documentation.

Since our X values remain constant in this example it is wasteful to
keep recreating the volume array.  The Y array, pressure, is the
single array that needs to be updated when the independent variables
change.  So, instead of defining pressure as an Array, we will define
it as a Property.  Property is a Traits type that allows you to define
a variable whose value is recalculated whenever it is requested.  In
addition, when the depends_on argument of a Property constructor is
set to list of traits in your HasTraits class, the property's trait
events will fire whenever any of the dependent trait's change events
fire.  This means that the pressure variable will fire a trait change
whenever our depends_on traits are changed.  Meanwhile, the Chaco plot
is automatically listening to the pressure variable, so the plot
display will get the new value of pressure whenever someone changes
the input parameters!

When the value of a Property trait is requested, the
_get_<trait_name>() method is called to calculate and return its
current value, so we define use the _get_pressure() method as our new
calculation method.  It is important to note that this implementation
does have a weakness.  Since we are calculating new pressures each
time someone changes the value of the input variables, this could slow
down the program if your calculation is long.  When the user drags a
slider widget, each stopping point along the slider will request a
recompute.

For the new implementation, these are the necessary changes:

1. Define the Y coordinate array variable as a Property instead of an
   Array.
2. Perform the calculations in the _get_<trait>() method for the Y
   coordinate array variable, which will be _get_pressure() in this 
   example.
3. Define the _<trait>_default() method to set the initial value of
   the X coordinate array so _get_pressure() does not have to keep 
   recalculating it.
4. Remove the previous @on_trait_change() decorator and calculation 
   method.

The new pieces of code to add to the Data class are::

    class Data(HasTraits):
        ...
        pressure = Property(Array, depends_on=['temperature', 
		   		               'attraction', 
 					       'totVolume'])
        ...
    
        def _volume_default(self):
          return arange(.1, 100)
    
        # Pressure is recalculated whenever one of the elements the property 
        # depends on changes.  No need to use @on_trait_change.
        def _get_pressure(self):
          return ((self.r_constant*self.temperature)
                  /(self.volume - self.totVolume) 
                 -(self.attraction/(self.volume*self.volume)))

You now no longer have to call an inconvenient calculation function
before the first call to configure_traits()!  


Source Code
===========

The final version on the program, vanderwaals.py::

    from enthought.traits.api \
        import HasTraits, Array, Range, Float, Enum, on_trait_change, Property
    from enthought.traits.ui.api import View, Item
    from enthought.chaco.chaco_plot_editor import ChacoPlotItem
    from numpy import arange
    
    class Data(HasTraits):
        volume = Array
        pressure = Property(Array, depends_on=['temperature', 'attraction', 
     				           'totVolume'])
        attraction = Range(low=-50.0,high=50.0,value=0.0)
        totVolume = Range(low=.01,high=100.0,value=0.01)
        temperature = Range(low=-50.0,high=50.0,value=50.0)
        r_constant= Float(8.314472)
        plot_type = Enum("line", "scatter")
    
        traits_view = View(ChacoPlotItem("volume", "pressure",
                                   type_trait="plot_type",
                                   resizable=True,
                                   x_label="Volume",
                                   y_label="Pressure",
                                   x_bounds=(-10,120),
                                   x_auto=False,
                                   y_bounds=(-2000,4000),
                                   y_auto=False,
                                   color="blue",
                                   bgcolor="white",
                                   border_visible=True,
                                   border_width=1,
                                   title='Pressure vs. Volume',
                                   padding_bg_color="lightgray"),
                           Item(name='attraction'),
                           Item(name='totVolume'),
                           Item(name='temperature'),   
                           Item(name='r_constant', style='readonly'),
                           Item(name='plot_type'),
                           resizable = True,
                           buttons = ["OK"],
                           title='Van der waal Equation',
                           width=900, height=800)
    
    
        def _volume_default(self):
            """ Default handler for volume Trait Array. """
            return arange(.1, 100)
    
        def _get_pressure(self):
            """Recalculate when one a trait the property depends on changes."""
            return ((self.r_constant*self.temperature)
                  /(self.volume - self.totVolume) 
                 -(self.attraction/(self.volume*self.volume)))
    
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        viewer = Data()
        viewer.configure_traits()

Commit message:

updating docs with more content from scipy 2008 tutorial

docs/source/user_manual/tutorial_2.rst, after:


.. _tutorial_2:

############################################
Modelling Van Der Waal's Equation With Chaco
############################################

Overview
========

This tutorial walks through the creation of an example program that plots a
scientific equation.  In particular, we will model `Van Der Waal's Equation
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Van_der_Waals_equation>`_, which is a
modification to the ideal gas law that takes into account the nonzero size of
molecules and the attraction to each other that they experience.


.. contents::

Development Setup
=================

In review, Traits is a manifest typing and reactive programming package for
Python.  It also provides UI features that will be used to create a simple GUI.
The Traits and Traits UI user manuals are good resources for learning about the
packages and can be found on the `Traits Wiki
<https://svn.enthought.com/enthought/wiki/Traits>`_.  The wiki includes
features, technical notes, cookbooks, FAQ and more.

You must have Chaco and its dependencies installed:
   * Traits
   * TraitsGUI
   * Enable


Writing the Program
===================

First, define a Traits class and the elements necessary need to model
the task.  The following Traits class is made for the Van Der Waal
equation, whose variables can be viewed on this wiki page, `Wikipedia
link <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Van_der_Waals_equation>`_.  The
volume and pressure variables hold lists of our X and Y coordinates,
respectively, and are defined as arrays.  The variables attraction and
totVolume are the input parameters specified by the user.  The type of
the variables as will dictate their appearance in the GUI.  For
example, attraction and totVolume are defined as Ranges, so they will
show up as slider bars.  Likewise, plot_type will be shown as a drop
down menu since it is defined as an Enum::

    # We'll also import a few things to be used later.
    from enthought.traits.api \
        import HasTraits, Array, Range, Float, Enum, on_trait_change, Property
    from enthought.traits.ui.api import View, Item 
    from enthought.chaco.chaco_plot_editor import ChacoPlotItem
    from numpy import arange
    
    class Data(HasTraits):
        volume = Array
        pressure = Array
        attraction = Range(low=-50.0,high=50.0,value=0.0)
        totVolume = Range(low=.01,high=100.0,value=0.01)
        temperature = Range(low=-50.0,high=50.0,value=50.0)
        r_constant= Float(8.314472)
        plot_type = Enum("line", "scatter")
    
    ....    


Creating the View
=================

The main GUI window is created by defining a Traits View instance.
This View contains all of the GUI elements, including the plot.  To
link a variable with a widget element on the GUI, we create a Traits
Item instance with the same name as the variable and pass it as an
argument of the Traits View instance declaration.  The Traits UI user
manual discusses the View and Item objects in depth.  In order to
embed a Chaco plot into a Traits View, you need to import the
ChacoPlotItem, which can be passed as a parameter to View just like a
the Item objects.  The first two arguments to ChacoPlotItem are the
lists of X and Y coordinates for the graph.  The variables volume and
pressure hold the lists of X and Y coordinates, and therefore are the
first two arguments to the Chaco2PlotItem.  Other parameters have been
provided to the plot for additional customization::

    class Data(HasTraits):
        ....
    
        traits_view = View(ChacoPlotItem("volume", "pressure",
                                   type_trait="plot_type",
                                   resizable=True,
                                   x_label="Volume",
                                   y_label="Pressure",
                                   x_bounds=(-10,120),
                                   x_auto=False,
                                   y_bounds=(-2000,4000),
                                   y_auto=False,
                                   color="blue",
                                   bgcolor="white",
                                   border_visible=True,
                                   border_width=1,
                                   title='Pressure vs. Volume',
                                   padding_bg_color="lightgray"),
                           Item(name='attraction'),
                           Item(name='totVolume'),
                           Item(name='temperature'),   
                           Item(name='r_constant', style='readonly'),
                           Item(name='plot_type'),
                           resizable = True,
                           buttons = ["OK"],
                           title='Van der waal Equation',
                           width=900, height=800)
    ....

    
Updating the Plot
=================

The power of Traits and Chaco enable the plot to update itself
whenever the X or Y arrays are changed.  So, we need a function to
re-calculate the X and Y coordinate lists whenever the input
parameters are changed by the user moving the sliders in the GUI.

The volume variable is the independent variable and pressure is the
dependent variable.  The relationship between pressure and volume, as
derived from the equation found on the wiki page, is::
 
               r_constant * Temperature       attraction
   Pressure =  ------------------------   -   ----------
                  Volume - totVolume          Volume**2


Next, there are two programing tasks to complete,

1. Define trait listener methods for your input parameters. These
   methods should be automatically called whenever the parameters are
   changed since it will be time to recalculate the pressure array.

2. Write a calculation method that will update your lists of X and
   Y coordinates for your plot.

The following is the code for these two needs::

    # Re-calculate when attraction, totVolume, or temperature are changed.
    @on_trait_change('attraction, totVolume, temperature')
    def calc(self):
        """ Update the data based on the numbers specified by the user. """
        self.volume = arange(.1, 100)
        self.pressure = ((self.r_constant*self.temperature) 
		         /(self.volume - self.totVolume)   
                        -(self.attraction/(self.volume*self.volume)))
        return

The calc() function computes the pressure array using the current
values of the independent variables.  Meanwhile, the
@on_trait_change() decorator (provided by Traits) tells Python to call
calc() whenever any of the variables attraction, totVolume, or
temperature change.


Testing your Program
====================

The application is complete, and can be tested by instantiating a copy
of the class and then creating the view by calling the
configure_traits() method on the class.  For a simple test, run these
lines from an interpreter or a separate module::

    from vanderwaals import Data
    viewer = Data()
    viewer.calc()            # Must calculate the initial (x,y) lists
    viewer.configure_traits()

Clicking and dragging on the sliders in the GUI will dynamically
update the pressure data array, and cause the plot to update, showing
the new values.

Screenshots
===========

Here is what the program looks like:

.. image:: images/vanderwaals.png


But it could be better....
==========================

It seems inconvenient to have to call a calculation function manually
before we configure_traits().  Also, the pressure equation depends on
the values of other variables, it would be nice to make the
relationship between the dependant and independent variables clearer.
There is another way we could define our variables that is easier for
the user, and provides better source documentation.

Since our X values remain constant in this example it is wasteful to
keep recreating the volume array.  The Y array, pressure, is the
single array that needs to be updated when the independent variables
change.  So, instead of defining pressure as an Array, we will define
it as a Property.  Property is a Traits type that allows you to define
a variable whose value is recalculated whenever it is requested.  In
addition, when the depends_on argument of a Property constructor is
set to list of traits in your HasTraits class, the property's trait
events will fire whenever any of the dependent trait's change events
fire.  This means that the pressure variable will fire a trait change
whenever our depends_on traits are changed.  Meanwhile, the Chaco plot
is automatically listening to the pressure variable, so the plot
display will get the new value of pressure whenever someone changes
the input parameters!

When the value of a Property trait is requested, the
_get_<trait_name>() method is called to calculate and return its
current value, so we define use the _get_pressure() method as our new
calculation method.  It is important to note that this implementation
does have a weakness.  Since we are calculating new pressures each
time someone changes the value of the input variables, this could slow
down the program if your calculation is long.  When the user drags a
slider widget, each stopping point along the slider will request a
recompute.

For the new implementation, these are the necessary changes:

1. Define the Y coordinate array variable as a Property instead of an
   Array.
2. Perform the calculations in the _get_<trait>() method for the Y
   coordinate array variable, which will be _get_pressure() in this 
   example.
3. Define the _<trait>_default() method to set the initial value of
   the X coordinate array so _get_pressure() does not have to keep 
   recalculating it.
4. Remove the previous @on_trait_change() decorator and calculation 
   method.

The new pieces of code to add to the Data class are::

    class Data(HasTraits):
        ...
        pressure = Property(Array, depends_on=['temperature', 
		   		               'attraction', 
 					       'totVolume'])
        ...
    
        def _volume_default(self):
          return arange(.1, 100)
    
        # Pressure is recalculated whenever one of the elements the property 
        # depends on changes.  No need to use @on_trait_change.
        def _get_pressure(self):
          return ((self.r_constant*self.temperature)
                  /(self.volume - self.totVolume) 
                 -(self.attraction/(self.volume*self.volume)))

You now no longer have to call an inconvenient calculation function
before the first call to configure_traits()!  


Source Code
===========

The final version on the program, vanderwaals.py::

    from enthought.traits.api \
        import HasTraits, Array, Range, Float, Enum, on_trait_change, Property
    from enthought.traits.ui.api import View, Item
    from enthought.chaco.chaco_plot_editor import ChacoPlotItem
    from numpy import arange
    
    class Data(HasTraits):
        volume = Array
        pressure = Property(Array, depends_on=['temperature', 'attraction', 
     				           'totVolume'])
        attraction = Range(low=-50.0,high=50.0,value=0.0)
        totVolume = Range(low=.01,high=100.0,value=0.01)
        temperature = Range(low=-50.0,high=50.0,value=50.0)
        r_constant= Float(8.314472)
        plot_type = Enum("line", "scatter")
    
        traits_view = View(ChacoPlotItem("volume", "pressure",
                                   type_trait="plot_type",
                                   resizable=True,
                                   x_label="Volume",
                                   y_label="Pressure",
                                   x_bounds=(-10,120),
                                   x_auto=False,
                                   y_bounds=(-2000,4000),
                                   y_auto=False,
                                   color="blue",
                                   bgcolor="white",
                                   border_visible=True,
                                   border_width=1,
                                   title='Pressure vs. Volume',
                                   padding_bg_color="lightgray"),
                           Item(name='attraction'),
                           Item(name='totVolume'),
                           Item(name='temperature'),   
                           Item(name='r_constant', style='readonly'),
                           Item(name='plot_type'),
                           resizable = True,
                           buttons = ["OK"],
                           title='Van der waal Equation',
                           width=900, height=800)
    
    
        def _volume_default(self):
            """ Default handler for volume Trait Array. """
            return arange(.1, 100)
    
        def _get_pressure(self):
            """Recalculate when one a trait the property depends on changes."""
            return ((self.r_constant*self.temperature)
                  /(self.volume - self.totVolume) 
                 -(self.attraction/(self.volume*self.volume)))
    
    if __name__ == '__main__':
        viewer = Data()
        viewer.configure_traits()
