docs/source/user_manual/tutorials_and_examples.rst, before:


.. _tutorials:

Tutorials, webinars, and examples
=================================

Tutorials
---------

* :ref:`Tutorial: Interactive plotting with Chaco <tutorial>`

  This is
  the main Chaco tutorial and introduces the basic concepts of
  how to use Chaco and Traits UI to do basic plots, customize
  layout, and add interactivity.

* :ref:`Tutorial: Using Chaco from IPython <tutorial_ipython>`

  This tutorial
  explains how to use Chaco from IPython using the Chaco ``shell``
  command-line plotting interface to build plots, in
  a Matlab or gnuplot-like style.

Webinars
--------

* `Step-by-step Chaco - 2D plotting with Python <http://enthought.com/training/SCPwebinar.php#w2009-07-17>`_

  Webinar recorded on, July 17, 2009, available as Windows Media Player (.wmv) video,
  Matroska (.mkv) video, and as a slideshare slide show.

* `EPDLab & Chaco <http://enthought.com/training/SCPwebinar.php#w2009-07-17>`_

  Webinar recorded on, June 19, 2009, available as Windows Media Player (.wmv) video,
  Matroska (.mkv) video, and as a slideshare slide show.

.. tutorial_wx

Examples
--------

* The :ref:`annotated examples <examples>` is a useful visual resource
  presenting a set of Chaco plots together with their source code.

* :ref:`Modeling Van del Waal's Equations <tutorial_van_der_waal>`
  is a complete example of creating a data
  model and then using Traits and Chaco to rapidly create interactive
  plot GUIs.

* :ref:`Creating an interactive Hyetograph <tutorial_hyetograph>`
  is an example of a hyetograph (a plot of rainfall intensity in relation
  to time) application. This example introduces the ``on_trait_listener``
  decorator and uses Chaco, simple Traits views, and live GUI interaction.

Commit message:

issue 291 - broken/outdated links in docs

docs/source/user_manual/tutorials_and_examples.rst, after:


.. _tutorials:

Tutorials, webinars, and examples
=================================

Tutorials
---------

* :ref:`Tutorial: Interactive plotting with Chaco <tutorial>`

  This is
  the main Chaco tutorial and introduces the basic concepts of
  how to use Chaco and Traits UI to do basic plots, customize
  layout, and add interactivity.

* :ref:`Tutorial: Using Chaco from IPython <tutorial_ipython>`

  This tutorial
  explains how to use Chaco from IPython using the Chaco ``shell``
  command-line plotting interface to build plots, in
  a Matlab or gnuplot-like style.

.. the webinars section here has been removed as the hyperlinks 
    dont exist and/or are broken. it will be readded once we 
    figure out how and where to host the webinars.


..  tutorial_wx

Examples
--------

* The :ref:`annotated examples <examples>` is a useful visual resource
  presenting a set of Chaco plots together with their source code.

* :ref:`Modeling Van del Waal's Equations <tutorial_van_der_waal>`
  is a complete example of creating a data
  model and then using Traits and Chaco to rapidly create interactive
  plot GUIs.

* :ref:`Creating an interactive Hyetograph <tutorial_hyetograph>`
  is an example of a hyetograph (a plot of rainfall intensity in relation
  to time) application. This example introduces the ``on_trait_listener``
  decorator and uses Chaco, simple Traits views, and live GUI interaction.
